---
title: Studying For An Olympiad - Crazy Talk?
date: 21-05-2021
author: Eric An
category:
banner: cco_chem.jpg
---

Imagine your average hell week, spending 2-3 hours everyday after school on a certain project or studying for an upcoming test. Now expand that timeframe from a week to 52 weeks and you’ve got yourself the study schedule of a successful high school math or science olympiad competitor. The life of a high school student who plans on having success in any olympiad competition is simple: wake up, school, study, contemplate life, study, sleep, and repeat. Seems like the schedule of an average IB student, but trust me, IB studying is little league compared to olympiad studying. So why in the world would one want to compete in an olympiad?

If you’re going into olympiads solely for a boost on your awards list or asking yourself, “how much better are my chances at Insert Prestigious College Here with being on an olympiads team?” then you might as well quit while you’re ahead. How come? Well the reasoning hinges on the idea that burnout WILL happen, and a merit-based mentality won’t hold for long in this long, mentally-draining marathon. Going far in an olympiad requires significant effort. Sure, it’s easy to say, but nearly everyone who gets to the international level has given their blood, sweat toils, and tears (literally) to get there. If you don’t have the right reasons to dig deep and pull through, then burnout is imminent, if not already wearing you down. In fact, even if you did have pure intentions, the burnout will still be felt. Giving up is easy; it comes down to the foundational reason for why you wanted to study for an olympiad that will hold you together or tear you apart.

I spent 4-5 solid months of 10 hours a week studying for the chemistry olympiad and that was one of the most mentally and physically draining times I have experienced. Even then, I’m sure there are people spending 3x, 4x, or even 5x the amount of time I did. You can trust me when I say that I love chemistry and pushed myself with olympiad study because I always admired the challenge brought from a combination of conceptual and problem-solving skills required to be successful in this subject. In addition, thanks to the additional free time with COVID, I was fascinated with the overall idea of science olympiads and wanted to try one out myself. The one thing I will say about maintaining motivation for olympiads is to never forget what made you interested in the given subject from the start. For example, with chemistry, whether it’s being interested in lab stuff or learning interesting random chemistry facts, don’t let the idea of competition, achievement, or prestige overcome that initial appeal. 

Once you decide to let olympiad study run the next year of your life and have developed the right mindset… congratulations you’ve taken the first step in what’s going to be the grindiest (is that a word?) roller coaster ride that, I can assure you, will be a once in a lifetime experience. Study smart, use outside resources, and build/find a community that will help you on your olympiad journey. It’s May 2021, and most training camp selections for each olympiad team have probably been made. But it’s never too early to start for next year. I hope I haven’t scared anyone :), and wish you the best in your future endeavors, olympiad or not. 
